                               PORTAGEshared

Technologies langagieres interactives / Interactive Language Technologies
Institut de technologie de l'information / Institute for Information Technology
Conseil national de recherches Canada / National Research Council Canada
Copyright 2004-2007, Sa Majeste la Reine du Chef du Canada
Copyright 2004-2007, Her Majesty in Right of Canada


SUMMARY OF LICENCE TERMS FOR THE PRACTITIONER

The terms and conditions under which this software is licensed are those
expressed in the licence itself, so please refer to the text of the licence
for reference.  The points below are provided only as a quick overview of what
is expected from you as a licensee of the PORTAGEshared software, and do not
replace the terms of the licence.  Numbers in brackets refer to a licence
clause.

DEFINITIONS

The following definitions are particularly important:

"Software" means the computer code, as well as the documentation and computer
data that you received (1.1).

"Modifications" means any addition to or deletion from the contents of a file
containing software or previous Modifications, and any new file that contains
any part of the Software or previous Modifications (1.4).

"Covered Code" means the Software or Modifications or the combination of the
Software and Modifications, in each case including portions thereof (1.5).

"Territory" means Canada (1.8).
 
CONFIDENTIALITY

The Software, including the source code, is confidential to NRC except for
published elements and elements which NRC states in writing to be not
confidential (7.1).

LICENCE GRANTS

The PORTAGEshared software cannot be sub-licensed: please contact NRC if
licensing is required for parties other than yourself or your colleagues
covered by your institution under the PORTAGEshared licence agreement signed
(2.3).

The PORTAGEshared software is provided to Canadian universities for research
and education purposes only (2.1a);

The PORTAGEshared software can be modified, provided you send to NRC all
available information about the Modifications including source code in a form
acceptable to NRC, within 180 days from the time of additions or changes
having been made (3.1); for details, please contact NRC.

SHARING MODIFICATIONS WITHIN THE PORTAGEshared COMMUNITY

In return for having access to PORTAGEshared, you and your institution grant
back Modifications to NRC in such a way that NRC may license them back to the
PORTAGEshared community, of which you are an active part (3.1).

COPYRIGHT AND ATTRIBUTION

You are required (5.1) to insert appropriate attribution to NRC for the
PORTAGEshared software by ensuring that presentation of PORTAGEshared on a
computer screen whenever it is accessed contains a copyright statement as
follows: 
	Copyright 2004-2006, Her Majesty in Right of Canada

You must also ensure that you have properly identified your contribution when
making Modifications (5.1);

You agree to acknowledge NRC as the source of PORTAGEshared in conference
presentations, scientific publications, and similar opportunities; however,
any such acknowledgement shall not imply that NRC endorses or approves
modified code (i.e., Covered Code) (8.1).

LICENCE DURATION AND POSSIBLE RENEWAL

As the diffusion of PORTAGEshared by NRC to Canadian universities is a new
initiative, the licence expires on December 31st, 2008, providing sufficient
time to establish a PORTAGEshared community (11.1).

Terms of renewal will be determined based on, among other factors, activities
during the licensing period and on the state of the PORTAGEshared community at
that time, aiming at furthering the Canadian capacity in machine translation
based on machine learning (11.2).

In order not to unduly terminate research by students as part of their
Master's or PhD work that was underway when the licence terminates, a licensee
retains the right to use Covered Code in order to fulfill such educational
commitments that have been made before termination of the licence.  Such
arrangement must be specifically negotiated by the licensee and NRC (11.5b).




