                               PORTAGEshared

Technologies langagieres interactives / Interactive Language Technologies
Institut de technologie de l'information / Institute for Information Technology
Conseil national de recherches Canada / National Research Council Canada
Copyright 2004-2009, Sa Majeste la Reine du Chef du Canada
Copyright 2004-2009, Her Majesty in Right of Canada

Distributed under specific licensing terms.  Please refer to your signed
license agreement for details.


                             Brief Description

Portage is a project to explore new techniques in Statistical Machine
Translation (SMT), and to develop state-of-the-art SMT technology that can be
used to support other projects at NRC and elsewhere.

The SMT system developed under the Portage project is also called "Portage";
this distribution for various partners is called PORTAGEshared.
PORTAGEshared includes a complete suite of software tools required for
phrase-based statistical machine translation, including:
 - preprocessing of French and English (tokenization, lowercasing, aligning);
 - training lexical translation models (IBM models 1 and 2, HMM) from aligned
   corpora;
 - training phrase-based translation models from aligned corpora and lexical
   models;
 - decoding (doing the actual translation, producing n-best lists or lattices);
 - rescoring (choosing the best hypothesis from an n-best list) using sources
   of information that are external to the decoder;
 - optimizing weights, both for decoding and for rescoring;
 - truecasing (restoring upper case letters in the output of the translation);
 - evaluation using BLEU, WER or PER.


                         Contents of this directory

   doc/         documentation
   src/         source code (if included in your distribution)
   framework/   sample experimental framework
   bin/         executable code (if included in your distribution)
   lib/         run-time libraries (if included in your distribution)
   test-suite/  various test suites
   README       this file
   INSTALL      installation instructions
   RELEASES     release history
   LICENCE      notes about your PORTAGEshared licence agreement
   SETUP.bash   config file for bash users
   SETUP.tcsh   config file for tcsh users
   *.patch      patches for upgrading a previous installation in place
                (if included in your distribution)


                              Getting started

The framework subdirectory provides a template experimental framework.  This is
intended as a reasonable experimental starting point.  We recommend you use
this framework as your starting point for real experiments.  A document is
included showing how to run a toy experiment with this framework:
framework-toy.pdf.  Even if you used PORTAGEshared before, we recommend you
read through this document, as it highlight the currently recommended
procedures for using PORTAGEshared.  If you used our old toy example as a
starting point previously, it may be worth starting again from the new
framework instead.

For full documentation, see doc/user-manual.html.


                               Contacting us

If you have any question about PORTAGEshared, be it technical, legal or
otherwise, you can contact us by e-mail at PORTAGEshared@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.


                      PORTAGEshared Users mailing list

We have created a mailing list for PORTAGEshared users, where questions of
general interest can be posted and answered publicly.  If you would like to be
added to this list, please e-mail PORTAGEshared@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.

