                              Generic Model 1.0

Technologies langagieres interactives / Interactive Language Technologies
Technologies de l'information et des communications /
   Information and Communications Technologies
Conseil national de recherches Canada / National Research Council Canada
Copyright 2012, Sa Majeste la Reine du Chef du Canada
Copyright 2012, Her Majesty in Right of Canada

Distributed under specific licensing terms.  Please refer to your signed
license agreement for details.

                          Portage Generic Model 1.0

If you have licensed the Portage generic models, you can install these models
in the generic-model directory.

The Portage Generic Model DVD contains trained English and French language
models (LM) and English->French and French->English translation models (TM) that
may be used in conjunction with your own in-domain language and translation
models in a tuned Portage system. The generic models were trained on a large
general language corpus and then pruned, keeping the most relevant data while
shrinking the models to a usable size. Using the generic models in conjunction
with your in-domain models can significantly improve translation quality of new
text, especially for small in-domain corpora.

                   Contents of the generic-model directory

   lm/      English and French Language Models
      gc.ca.lm-train_en-kn-5g.filt.binlm.gz
      	    English LM in binlm format for training a system.
      gc.ca.lm-train_en-kn-5g.filt.tplm/
      	    English LM in tplm format, used for translation in an 
      	    French->English system using the PortageLive translation server
      gc.ca.lm-train_fr-kn-5g.filt.binlm.gz
      	    French LM in binlm format for training a system.
      gc.ca.lm-train_fr-kn-5g.filt.tplm/
      	    French LM in tplm format, used for translation in an 
      	    English->French system using the PortageLive translation server
   tm/      English->French and French->English Translation Models
      cpt.merged.hmm3-kn3-zn.gc.ca.tm-train.en2fr.gz
            TM for training English->French translation system
      cpt.merged.hmm3-kn3-zn.gc.ca.tm-train.fr2en.gz
            TM for training French->English translation system
   INSTALL  installation instructions for the Generic Model
   README   this file

                               Getting Started

Plese refer to the INSTALL file in this directory for installation instructions.

Once installed, the models of the Portage Generic Model are very easy to use in
conjunction with your in-domain models in the Portage framework.

For the purpose of this description, we assume the generic model is installed in
in the standard location:
	$HOME/Portage1.5.0/generic-model 

You can use the language models in the lm directory in simple (log-linear)
combination with your own in-domain LMs or in linear combination with a mixlm.
To do so, prior to training your Portage system, you must edit your framework
Makefile.params file as follows.

To train a Portage system using the generic LM in simple combination with your
in-domain LMs, add the file path of the binlm format target language generic
model LM to the LM_PRETRAINED_TGT_LMS variable definition. For example, for an
English->French system, this would be:

LM_PRETRAINED_TGT_LMS ?= ${HOME}/Portage1.5.0/generic-model/lm/gc.ca.lm-train_fr-kn-5g.filt.binlm.gz

To train a Portage system using the generic LM in linear combination with your
in-domain LMs in a mixlm, add the file path of the binlm format target language
generic model LM to the MIXLM_PRETRAINED_TGT_LMS variable definition. For
example, for an English->French system, this would be:

MIXLM_PRETRAINED_TGT_LMS ?= ${HOME}/Portage1.5.0/generic-model/lm/gc.ca.lm-train_fr-kn-5g.filt.binlm.gz

You can use the translation models (CPTs) in the tm directory in simple (log-
linear) combination with your own in-domain CPTs or in a linear combination with
a mixtm CPT. To do so, prior to training your Portage system, you must edit your
framework Makefile.params file as follows.

To train a Portage system using the generic TM in simple combination with your
in-domain TMs, add the file path of the en2fr generic model CPT (for an English
->French system) or fr2en generic model CPT (for an French->English system) to
the TM_PRETRAINED_TMS variable definition. For example, for an English->French
system, this would be:

TM_PRETRAINED_TMS ?= ${HOME}/Portage1.5.0/generic-model/tm/cpt.merged.hmm3-kn3-zn.gc.ca.tm-train.en2fr.gz

To train a Portage system using the generic TM in linear combination with your
in-domain TMs in a mixtm, add the file path of the en2fr generic model CPT (for
an English->French system) or fr2en generic model CPT (for an French->English
system) to the MIXTM_PRETRAINED_TMS variable definition. For example, for an
English->French system, this would be:

MIXTM_PRETRAINED_TMS ?= ${HOME}/Portage1.5.0/generic-model/tm/cpt.merged.hmm3-kn3-zn.gc.ca.tm-train.en2fr.gz

The framework will automatically create symbolic links to the necessary generic
model files within the framework structure, including the tplm format LM for
PortageLive, and the source language LM if needed for training a mixlm.

In all cases, do not include the generic model name in the TRAIN_LM, MIXLM,
TRAIN_TM, or MIXTM definitions in the Makefile.params file.

Our recommended practice is to use both the generic model LM and generic model
TM, both in linear combination with your in-domain models. Our experience is
that the linear mixes (mixlm and mixtm) yield a system with better translation
quality than the simple log-linear combination. However, in some situations, if
translation time is an issue, say for single-sentence-at-a-time translation, a
system using a simple LM combination may translate new text more quickly.



